The advance of democracy
February 10, 1933
In my last letter I tried to give you a glimpse of the progress of science in the nineteenth century. Let us now look at another aspect of this century—the growth of the democratic idea. 
You will remember my telling you of the war of ideas in eighteenth—century France; of Voltaire, the greatest thinker and writer of his day, and of others in France, who challenged many old notions of religion and society and boldly advanced new theories. Such political thinking was largely confined to France at the time.
In Germany there were the philosophers who interested themselves in more abstruse questions of philosophy. In England, business and trade were increasing and most people were not fond of thinking unless circumstances made them do so. One notable book, however, came out in England in the second half of the eighteenth century. This was Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations. It was not a book on politics as such, but on political economy or economics. This subject, liked all other subjects at the time, was mixed up with religion and ethics, and there was thus a great deal of confusion about it.
Adam Smith dealt with it in a scientific way and, disregarding all ethical complications, tried to find natural laws which governed economics. 
Economics, as you perhaps know, deals withthe management of the income and expenditure of the people or a country as a whole, of what they produce and what they consume, and their relations with each other and other countries and people. Adam Smith believed that all these rather complicated operations took place according to fixed natural laws, which he set down in his book. He also believed that full liberty should be given for the development of industry so that these laws might not be interfered with. 
This was the beginning of the doctrine of laissez-fairabout which I have already told you something. Adam Smith’s book had nothing to do with new democratic ideas which were germinating in France at the time. But his attempt at scientific treatment of one of the most important problems, which affected men and nations shows that men were going in a new direction, away from the old theological way of looking at everything. 
Adam Smith is considered the father of the science of economics, and he inspired many English economists of the nineteenth century.
The new science of economics was confined to professors and a few well-read men. But meanwhile the new ideas of democracy were spreading, and the American and French Revolutions gave them tremendous popularity and advertisement. 
The fine-sounding words and phrases of the American Declaration of Independence and the French Declaration of Rights stirred people to the depths. To the millions who were oppressed and exploited they brought a thrill and a message of deliverance. 
Both the declarations spoke of liberty and quality and of the right to happiness which everyone has. The proud declaration of these precious rights did not result in the people obtaining them. Even now, a century and a half after these declarations, few can be said to enjoy them. But even the declaration of these principles were extraordinary and life-giving. 
The old idea in Europe as elsewhere, in Christianity as in other religions, was that sin and unhappiness were the common and inevitable lot of man. Religion seemed to give a permanent and even an honored place to poverty and misery in this world. The promises and rewards of religion were all for some other world; here we were told to bear our lot with resignation and not seek any fundamental change. 
Charity was encouraged, the giving of crumbs to the poor, but there was no idea of doing away with poverty, or with a system which resulted in poverty. The very ideas of liberty and equality were opposed to the authoritarian outlook of the church and society. 
Democracy did not, of course, say that all men were in fact equal. It could not say this, because it is obvious enough that there are inequalities between different men: physical inequalities which result in some being stronger than others, mental inequalities which are seen in some people being abler or wiser than others, moral inequalities which make some unselfish and others not so. 
It is quite possible that many of these inequalities are due to different kinds of upbringing and education or want of education. Of two boys and girls who are similar in ability, give one a good education and the other no education, and after some years there will be a vast different between the two. Or give one of them healthy food and the other bad and insufficient food, and the former will grow properly, while the latter will be weak and ailing and underdeveloped. 
So one’s upbringing and surroundings and training and education make a vast deal of difference, and it may be that if we could give the same training and opportunities to everybody, there would be far less inequality than there is now. 
This is indeed very likely. But so far as democracy is concerned, it admitted that men were as a matter of fact unequal, and yet it stated that each one of them should be treated as having an equal political and social value. 
If we accept this democratic theory in its entirety, we are let to all manner of revolutionary conclusions. We need not go into these at this stage, but one obvious consequence of the theory was that each person should have a vote for the election of a representative to the governing assembly or parliament.The vote was the symbol of political power, and it was assumed that if everyone had a vote, each such person would have an equal share in political power. 
Therefore one of the principal demands of democracy, right through the nineteenth century, was the extension of the franchise—that is, the right to vote. Adult suffrage or franchise meant that every adult or grownup person should have the vote. For a long time women were not allowed to vote, and there was not very long ago a tremendous agitation by them, especially in Britain. 
In most advanced countries now there is adult suffrage for both men and women. But, curiously enough, when most people had got the vote they found that it did not make very much difference to them. In spite of having the vote, they had no power, or very little power, in the State.A vote is of little use to a hungry man. The people with real power were those who could take advantage of his hunger and make him work to do anything else that they wanted to their own advantage. 
Thus political power, which the vote was supposed to give, was seen to be a shadow with no substance, without economic power, and the brave dreams of the early democrats, that equality would follow the vote, came to nothing. This was, however, a much later development. In the early days—the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century—there was great enthusiasm among thedemocrats. Democracy was going to make everybody a free and equal citizen and the government of the State would work for the happiness of everybody. 
There was a great reaction against the autocracy of kings and governments of the eighteenth century and the way they had abused their absolute power. This led people to proclaim the rights of individuals in their declarations. Probably these statements of the rights individuals in the American and French declarations erred somewhat on the other side. 
In a complex society it is not an easy matter to separate individuals and give them perfect freedom. The interests of such an individual and of society may and do clash. However, this may be, democracy stood for a great deal of individual freedom.
England, which was backward in political ideas in the eighteenth century, was greatly affected by the American and French Revolutions. The first reaction was one of fear against the new democratic ideas and the possibility of a social revolution at home. The ruling classes become even more conservative and reactionary. But still the new ideas spread among the intellectuals. 
Thomas Paine was an interesting Englishman of this period. He was in America at the time of the war of Independence and helped the Americans. He seems to have been partly responsible for converting the Americans to the idea of complete independence. 
On his return to England he wrote a book, the rights of man, in defence of the French Revolution which had just begun. In this book he attacked monarchy and pleaded for democracy. The British Government outlawed him because of this, and he had to fly to France. In Paris he soon became a member of the National Convention. But in 1793 he was put in prison by the Jacobins because he had opposed the execution of Louis XVI. In the Pairs gaol he wrote another book called theAge of Reason, in which he criticized the religious outlook. Paine being out of reach of the English courts (he was discharged from the Paris prison after the death of Robespierre), his English publisher was sentenced to imprisonment for issuing this book. 
Such a book was considered dangerous to society, as religion was supposed to be necessary to keep the poor in their place. Several publishers of Pine’s book, including women, were sent to prison. It is interesting to find that Shelley, the poet, wrote a letter of protest to the judge.
In Europe the French Revolution was the parent of the democratic ideas that spread throughout the first half of the nineteenth century. Indeed, the very ideas of the Revolution persisted, although conditions were rapidly changing. 
These democratic ideas were the intellectual reaction against kings and autocracy. They were based on conditions prior to industrialization. But the new industry—steam and big machinery—were completely upsetting the old order. Yet, strange to say, the radicals and democrats of the early nineteenth century ignored these changes and went on talking in the fine phrases of the Revolution and the Declaration of the Rights of man. 
To them perhaps these changes were purely material and did not affect the high spiritual and moral and political demands of democracy. But material things have a way of refusing to be ignored.It is very interesting to find how extraordinarily difficult it is for people to give up old ideas and accept new ones. 
They will shut their eyes and their minds and refuse to see; they will fight to hold on to the old even when it harms them. They will do almost anything but accept the new ideas and adapt themselves to new conditions. 
The power of conservatism is prodigious. Even the radicals, who imagine themselves very advanced, often stick to old and exploded ideas, and shut their eyes to changing conditions. It is no wonder that progress is slow, and often there is a great lag between actual conditions and people’s ideas—resulting in revolutionary situations. 
Democracy was thus for many decades the carrying on of the traditions and ideas of the French Revolution. This failure to adapt itself the new conditions led to the weakening of democracy towards the end of the century, and later, in the twentieth century, to its repudiation by many people. In India today many of our advanced politicians still talk in terms of the French Revolution and the Rights of Man, not appreciating that much has happened since then.
The early democrats naturally took to rationalism. Their demand for freedom of thought and speech could hardly be reconciled with dogmatic religion and theology. Thus democracy joined with science to weaken the hold of theological dogmas. People began to dare to examine the Bible, as if it was an ordinary book and not something that must be accepted blindly and without questioning. 
This criticism of the Bible was called the “higher criticism”. The critics came to the conclusion that the Bible was a collection of documents written by different persons in different ages. They also were of the opinion that Jesus had no intention of founding a religion. Many of the old beliefs were shaken by this criticism. As the old religious foundations were being weakened by science and democratic ideas, attempts were made to formulate a philosophy to take the place of the old religion. One of the these attempts was by a French philosopher, Auguste Comte who lived from 1798 to 1857. 
Comte felt that the old theology and dogmatic religions were out of date, but he was convinced that some kind of religion was a social necessity. He therefore proposed a “religion of humanity” and called it “Positivism”. This was to be based on love, order, and progress. There was nothing supernatural about it; it was based on science.
At its back, as indeed at the back of nearly all current ideas of the nineteenth century, was the idea of the progress of the human race. Comte’s religion remained the belief of a few intellectuals only, but his general influence on European thought was great. He may be said to begin the study of the science of sociology, which deals with human society and culture. 
A contemporary of Comte’s, but surviving him by many years, was the English philosopher and economist, John Stuart Mill (1806~1873). Mill was influenced by Comte’s teaching as well as by his socialistic ideas. 
He tried to give a new direction to the English school of political economy, which had grown up round the teaching of Adam Smith, and brought some socialistic principles into economic thought. 
But he is best known as the chief of “utilitarian”. “Utilitarianism” was a new theory, started a little earlier in England, and brought into greater prominence by Mill. 
As its name suggests, its guiding philosophy was utility or usefulness. “the greatest happiness of the greatest number” was the fundamental principle of the Utilitarian. This was the only test of right and wrong.
Actions were said to be right in proportion as they tended to promote happiness, and wrong in so far as they tended to promote the reverse of happiness. Society and government were to be organized with this point of view—the promotion of the greatest happiness of the greatest number.
This viewpoint was not quite the same as the earlier democratic doctrine of equal rights for everybody. The greatest happiness of the greatest number might conceivably require the sacrifice for the unhappiness of a smaller number. 
I am merely pointing this difference out to you, but we need not discuss it here. Democracy thus came to mean the rights of the majority.
John Stuart Mill was a strong advocate of the democratic idea of liberty for the individual. He wrote a little book, On Liberty, which became famous. I shall give you an extract from this book in favor of freedom of speech and the free expression of opinion. 
But the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the opinion, still more than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error. 
we can never be sure that the opinion we are endeavoring to stifle is a false opinion; and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still. 
Such an attitude could not be reconciled with that of dogmatic religion or despotism. It was the attitude of a philosopher, a seeker after truth. 
I have given you just a few names of important thinkers in western Europe during the nineteenth century to show the way ideas were influence and to serve as landmarks in the world of thought. 
But the influence of these people , and the early democrats generally, was more or less confined to the intellectual classes. To some extent it percolated through the intellectuals to the others. 
Although the direct influence on the masses was slight, the indirect influence of this democratic ideology was great. Even the direct influence in some matters, such as the demand for the vote, was great. 
As the nineteenth century grew older other movements and ideas developed—the working–class movement and socialism. These had their influence on current democratic notions and were themselves affected by them. 
Some people looked upon socialism as an alternative to democracy; others considered it as a necessary part of it. 
We have seen that the democrats were full of notions of liberty and equality and every man’s equal right to happiness.་But they realized soon that happiness did not come by merely making it a fundamental right. Apart from other things, a certain measure of physical wellbeing was necessary. 
A person who was starving was not likely to be happy. This led them to think that happiness depended on a better distribution of wealth among the people. This leads to socialism, and that must wait till our next letter.
In the first half of the nineteenth century democracy, and nationalism joined hands wherever subject nations or people were fighting for freedom. Mazzini of Italy was typical of this kind of democratic patriotism. 
Latter in the century nationalism gradually lost this democratic character and became more aggressive and authoritarian. The State became the god which had to be worshiped by everyone. 
English businessmen were the leaders of the new industry. They were not much interested in high democratic principles and the people’s right to liberty.But they discovered that greater liberty for the people was good for business. It raised the standard of the workers, and gave them an illusion of possessing some freedom, and made them more efficient at their work. Popular education was also required for industrial efficiency. Businessmen and industrialists, appreciating the expediency of this, piously agreed to confer these favors on the people. In the second half of the century education of a kind spread rapidly among the masses in England and western Europe.